INTRODUCTION

THE ARGUMENT
BOOK III

On relieving annoyance

THOUGH we possess a mind as well as a body, it is a strange thing
that while the science of medicine exists for the benefit of the latter
and is in high esteem, the corresponding science, philosophy, is either
neglected or disliked—because, perhaps, while the mind appreciates a
bodily disorder, the body has no sense of mental disorder and a diseased
mind is unaware of its own condition. Nature who might have ordered
otherwise has so designed our constitutions that the sparks or seeds of
virtue which, if cultivated, ensure health of mind are easily destroyed.
The process of destruction begins almost at birth under the infiuence of
nurses, parents, teachers, literature and public opinion which teach us
to mistake the false for the true, and to aim at material rather than
moral success: we aim in consequence at the false rather than at the
true glory, the counterpart of virtue, seduced by popular opinion rather
than in reliance upon the judgment of the wise. Blinded by these false
notions men are involuntarily the instruments of disaster to others as
well as to themselves. Must we not try to find some remedy sor this
unhealthy state of mind, which is far more serious than any bodily
disorder? Anxiety and lust are, for instance, worse than disease3 and
surely the human mind which has invented a cure for diseases can
discover, and has discovered, a cure for the mind more reliable even
than the science of medicine 3 this cure is to be found in philosophy,
and it is surely important enough to be taken seriously. The general
question has already been discussed in the Hortensius 3 here Cicero will
only reproduce the aspect of the matter discussed upon this particular
occasion, as following up the discussion of the two preceding days he
and his friends discussed upon the third day the truth of a general
proposition laid down by one of their number, ἓξ 1—7.

The proposition was: lee wz'se man ἐς subject to annoyance. Cicero
contends in reply that as aegritudo is only one of several disorders
of the mind, the mind which is subject to one may be subject to all and

H. b

